README.md, before:

# ed(1) Rule 110 Simulation

This [ed(1)][] script simulates [Rule 110][], proving that ed(1) is
Turing-complete.

*The old self-modifying version, along with its README, can be found in
the [`selfmod`](./selfmod) directory. There is a [blog post][] that
provides a full explanation for this self-modifying version. This new
version is built on the same concepts.*

[ed(1)]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ed_%28text_editor%29
[Rule 110]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_110
[blog post]: https://nixwindows.wordpress.com/2018/03/13/ed1-is-turing-complete/

## Overview

The simulation is run on a data file whose last line is the input. This
file gets loaded into `ed`'s buffer. Unlike the old version, the script
is standalone and the data is not embedded into the script.

The Rule is implemented using substitutions.

The script is a [quine][] that writes itself to the beginning of the
buffer, partitioning the buffer into a code section and a data section.
Recursion is achieved by writing the code section to the stdin of an
invocation of `ed` using the `w` command. To pass data between recursive
calls, the data section is written to the data file before the recursive
call is done. If you do not consider using `!` to invoke another
instance of `ed`, then this script does not prove Turing-completeness.

To simplify writing the script, the full quine, `rule110.ed`, is built
from the half-quine in `rule110.proto.ed`. Naturally, the build script,
`build.ed`, is also written as an `ed` script.

[quine]: https://github.com/tpenguinltg/ed1-quine

## Building

Run `make`:

```sh
$ make
```

This will take `rule110.proto.ed` and build the full script, `rule110.ed`.

## Running

To run the simulation on the data file `cells.dat`, call `ed` on the
file, feeding the script through stdin:

```sh
$ ed -s cells.dat < rule110.ed; wait
```

The simulation will not terminate automatically, so you will have to
terminate it manually using `^C` or `kill`/`killall`/`pkill`. Having
`wait` at the end is not strictly necessary, but it keeps your prompt
from appearing until all of the child processes spawned by `ed` have
died.

The data file (`cells.dat` in this example, but the name does not matter
as long as it does not contain a `'`) should contain the input on the
last line. Apart from the terminal newline, it must contain only `0`s
and `1`s. The input line can be as wide as you want, but it must have at
least one character (apart from the newline).

The results of the simulation will be written back to the data file.

For a nicer view of the results, consider running the data file through
`sed` to change the `0` and `1` characters:

```sh
$ sed 's/0/ /g;s/1/#/g' cells.dat
```

## License

MIT. See the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Add run make target
This make target runs the example invocation. It requires a valid
cells.dat file.

README.md, after:

# ed(1) Rule 110 Simulation

This [ed(1)][] script simulates [Rule 110][], proving that ed(1) is
Turing-complete.

*The old self-modifying version, along with its README, can be found in
the [`selfmod`](./selfmod) directory. There is a [blog post][] that
provides a full explanation for this self-modifying version. This new
version is built on the same concepts.*

[ed(1)]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ed_%28text_editor%29
[Rule 110]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_110
[blog post]: https://nixwindows.wordpress.com/2018/03/13/ed1-is-turing-complete/

## Overview

The simulation is run on a data file whose last line is the input. This
file gets loaded into `ed`'s buffer. Unlike the old version, the script
is standalone and the data is not embedded into the script.

The Rule is implemented using substitutions.

The script is a [quine][] that writes itself to the beginning of the
buffer, partitioning the buffer into a code section and a data section.
Recursion is achieved by writing the code section to the stdin of an
invocation of `ed` using the `w` command. To pass data between recursive
calls, the data section is written to the data file before the recursive
call is done. If you do not consider using `!` to invoke another
instance of `ed`, then this script does not prove Turing-completeness.

To simplify writing the script, the full quine, `rule110.ed`, is built
from the half-quine in `rule110.proto.ed`. Naturally, the build script,
`build.ed`, is also written as an `ed` script.

[quine]: https://github.com/tpenguinltg/ed1-quine

## Building

Run `make`:

```sh
$ make
```

This will take `rule110.proto.ed` and build the full script, `rule110.ed`.

## Running

To run the simulation on the data file `cells.dat`, call `ed` on the
file, feeding the script through stdin:

```sh
$ ed -s cells.dat < rule110.ed; wait
```

For convenience, the above invocation is also available as the `run` make
target, so you may alternatively run it using `make`:

```sh
$ make run
```

The simulation will not terminate automatically, so you will have to
terminate it manually using `^C` or `kill`/`killall`/`pkill`. Having
`wait` at the end is not strictly necessary, but it keeps your prompt
from appearing until all of the child processes spawned by `ed` have
died.

The data file (`cells.dat` in this example, but the name does not matter
as long as it does not contain a `'`) should contain the input on the
last line. Apart from the terminal newline, it must contain only `0`s
and `1`s. The input line can be as wide as you want, but it must have at
least one character (apart from the newline). **Do not run this script on
a file with invalid data**, or else you'll have to hunt down a stray
`ed` process.

The results of the simulation will be written back to the data file.

For a nicer view of the results, consider running the data file through
`sed` to change the `0` and `1` characters:

```sh
$ sed 's/0/ /g;s/1/#/g' cells.dat
```

## License

MIT. See the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for details.
